PART 1 Competing with Operations

Bizuayehu Tesfaye/AP Photos

1
USING OPERATIONS
TO COMPETE
The seventh novel in the Harry Potter series was released on July 21, 2007 and became an
instant best seller around the globe. Because the book had to be delivered in a tight time
window to the customers, Scholastic coordinated its publishing and distribution processes
in USA months in advance of the release date.

Scholastic and Harry Potter
cholastic is the world’s largest publisher and distributor of children’s books
and educational materials. Founded in 1920, it had $1.9 billion in revenues
in fiscal 2011 with offices in 16 countries including North America, Europe,
Southeast Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, Australia, New Zealand, and
Africa. Scholastic started planning in early 2007 for the worldwide release of the
eagerly awaited seventh book Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in the acclaimed series by J.K. Rowling on the boy wizard. When the author finished the
book in spring 2007, Scholastic’s printers R.R. Donnelly & Sons and Quebecor
World worked around the clock to make sure that the book would be ready by
the release date. To save time in loading and unloading, Scholastic bypassed its
own warehouses and required its truckers, Yellow Transportation and JB Hunt
Transport Services, to use the same size trailers and pallets to ship books
directly from six printing sites to big retailers like Barnes & Noble and Amazon.com.
This fleet of trucks, if lined up bumper-to-bumper, would stretch for 15 miles.
GPS transponders were used to alert Scholastic by e-mail if the driver or the
trailer veered off the designated routes. The timing was particularly tricky for
e-tailers, who had to directly ship books in advance for individual orders to arrive
simultaneously around the country in order to minimize the risk of someone
leaking the book’s ending.

S

21

22

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Since close to 90 percent of sales of such special books occur in the first
week, they get special treatment to save time, money, space, and work. Scholastic had to customize, coordinate, and synchronize its operations and supply
chain processes across multiple partners at the printing, warehousing, distribution, and retailing locations to ensure that the last book in the Harry Potter series
reached the final customers no more than a few hours before the scheduled
July 21, 12:01 A.M. release deadline. Not bad for a bunch of Muggles who
transported 12 million copies in a short time window without the magical floo
powder, portkeys, and broomsticks!
Source: Dean Foust, “Harry Potter and the Logistical Nightmare,” Business Week (August 6, 2007), p. 9; Michelle
Regenold, “Shipping Harry Potter: How Do They Do That?” www.go-explore-trans.org/2007/mar-apr/shipping_
HP.cfm; www.scholastic.com, 2011.

LEARNING GOALS

After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

 Describe operations and supply chains in terms of inputs,
processes, outputs, information flows, suppliers, and
customers.

 Define an operations strategy and its linkage to corporate
strategy, as well as the role it plays as a source of
competitive advantage in a global marketplace.

operations management
The systematic design, direction,
and control of processes that
transform inputs into services and
products for internal, as well as
external, customers.
process
Any activity or group of activities
that takes one or more inputs,
transforms them, and provides
one or more outputs for its
customers.
operation
A group of resources performing all
or part of one or more processes.
supply chain
An interrelated series of processes within and across firms
that produces a service or
product to the satisfaction of
customers.
supply chain management
The synchronization of a firm’s
processes with those of its suppliers and customers to match
the flow of materials, services,
and information with customer
demand.

 Identify nine competitive priorities used in operations
strategy, and their linkage to marketing strategy.

 Explain how operations can be used as a competitive
weapon.

 Identify the global trends and challenges facing operations
management.

Operations management refers to the systematic design, direction, and control of processes that transform inputs into services and products for internal, as well as external customers.
This book deals with managing those fundamental activities and processes that organizations
use to produce goods and services that people use every day. A process is any activity or group of
activities that takes one or more inputs, transforms them, and provides one or more outputs for
its customers. For organizational purposes, processes tend to be clustered together into operations. An operation is a group of resources performing all or part of one or more processes. Processes can be linked together to form a supply chain, which is the interrelated series of processes
within a firm and across different firms that produce a service or product to the satisfaction of customers.1 A firm can have multiple supply chains, which vary by the product or service provided.
Supply chain management is the synchronization of a firm’s processes with those of its suppliers
and customers to match the flow of materials, services, and information with customer demand.
For example, Scholastic must schedule the printing of a very large quantity of books in a timely
fashion, receive orders from its largest customers, directly load and dispatch a fleet of trucks by
specific destination while bypassing regular warehouses, keep track of their progress using technology, and finally, bill their customers and collect payment. The operational planning at Scholastic, along with internal and external coordination within its supply chain, provides one example of
designing customized processes for competitive operations.

Operations and Supply Chain Management
across the Organization
Broadly speaking, operations and supply chain management underlie all departments and functions in a business. Whether you aspire to manage a department or a particular process within it,
or you just want to understand how the process you are a part of fits into the overall fabric of the
business, you need to understand the principles of operations and supply chain management.
Operations serve as an excellent career path to upper management positions in many organizations. The reason is that operations managers are responsible for key decisions that affect
the success of the organization. In manufacturing firms, the head of operations usually holds the
1The

terms supply chain and value chain are sometimes used interchangeably.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

23

Finance
title chief operations officer (COO) or vice president of manufacturing
(or of production or operations). The corresponding title in a service orAcquires financial
ganization might be COO or vice president (or director) of operations.
resources and capital
Reporting to the head of operations are the managers of departments,
for inputs
such as customer service, production and inventory control, and quality
assurance.
Figure 1.1 shows operations as one of the key functions within an
organization. The circular relationships in Figure 1.1 highlight the imMaterial &
Sales
portance of the coordination among the three mainline functions of
Service Inputs
Revenue
Support Functions
any business, namely, (1) operations, (2) marketing, and (3) finance.
Each function is unique and has its own knowledge and skill areas, pri• Accounting
mary responsibilities, processes, and decision domains. From an exter• Information Systems
nal perspective, finance generates resources, capital, and funds from
• Human Resources
investors and sales of its goods and services in the marketplace. Based
• Engineering
on business strategy, the finance and operations functions then decide
Operations
Marketing
how to invest these resources and convert them into physical assets
and material inputs. Operations subsequently transforms these mateGenerates sales
Translates
Product &
rial and service inputs into product and service outputs. These outputs materials and
of outputs
Service Outputs
services into
must match the characteristics that can be sold in the selected markets
outputs
by marketing. Marketing is responsible for producing sales revenue of
the outputs, which become returns to investors and capital for supporting operations. Functions such as accounting, information systems,  FIGURE 1.1
Integration between Different Functional Areas of a Business
human resources, and engineering make the firm complete by providing essential information, services, and other managerial support.
These relationships provide direction for the business as a whole, and are aligned to the
same strategic intent. It is important to understand the entire circle, and not just the individual
functional areas. How well these functions work together determines the effectiveness of the
organization. Functions should be integrated and should pursue a common strategy. Success
depends on how well they are able to do so. No part of this circle can be dismissed or minimized
without loss of effectiveness, and regardless of how departments and functions are individually
managed, they are always linked together through processes. Thus, a firm competes not only by
offering new services and products, creative marketing, and skillful finance, but also through its
unique competencies in operations and sound management of core processes.

The history of modern operations and supply chain
management is rich and over two hundred years old,
even though its practice has been around in one form
or another for centuries. James Watt invented the
steam engine in 1785. The subsequent establishment
of railroads facilitated efficient movement of goods
throughout Europe, and eventually even in distant
colonies such as India. With the invention of the cotton gin in 1794, Eli Whitney introduced the concept
of interchangeable parts. It revolutionized the art of
machine-based manufacturing, and coupled with the
invention of the steam engine, lead to the great industrial revolution in England and the rest of Europe.
The textile industry was one of the earliest industries
to be mechanized. The industrial revolution gradually
spread to the United States and the rest of the world in
the nineteenth century, and was accompanied by such
great innovations as the internal combustion engine,
steam-powered ships, metallurgy of iron making, largescale production of chemicals, and invention of maHenry Ford with a Model T in Buffalo, New York, in 1921. The Ford Motor Company,
chine tools, among others. The foundations of modern
founded in 1903, produced about one million Model T’s in 1921.
manufacturing and technological breakthroughs were
also inspired by the creation of a mechanical computer
by Charles Babbage in the early part of the nineteenth century. He also pioneered the concept of
division of labor, which laid the foundation for scientific management of operations and supply
chain management that was further improved upon by Frederick Taylor in 1911.

AFP/Newscom

Historical Evolution of Operations and Supply
Chain Management

24

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

external customers
A customer who is either an
end user or an intermediary
(e.g., manufacturers, financial
institutions, or retailers) buying
the firm’s finished services or
products.
internal customers
One or more employees or processes that rely on inputs from
other employees or processes in
order to perform their work.
external suppliers
The businesses or individuals
who provide the resources, services, products, and materials for
the firm’s short-term and longterm needs.
internal suppliers

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

A Process View
You might wonder why we begin by looking at processes, rather than at departments or even the
firm. The reason is that a process view of the firm provides a much more relevant picture of the
way firms actually work. Departments typically have their own set of objectives, a set of resources
with capabilities to achieve those objectives, and managers and employees responsible for performance. Some processes, such as billing, may be so specific that they are contained wholly within a
single department, such as accounting.
The concept of a process, however, can be much broader. A process can have its own set of
objectives, involve a work flow that cuts across departmental boundaries, and require resources
from several departments. You will see examples throughout this text of companies that discovered how to use their processes to gain a competitive advantage. You will notice that the key to
success in many organizations is a keen understanding of how their processes work, since an organization is only as effective as its processes. Therefore, operations management is relevant and
important for all students, regardless of major, because all departments have processes that must
be managed effectively to gain a competitive advantage.

How Processes Work

Figure 1.2 shows how processes work in an organization. Any process has inputs and outputs. Inputs
can include a combination of human resources (workers and managers), capital (equipment and
facilities), purchased materials and services, land, and energy. The numbered circles in Figure 1.2
represent operations through which services, products, or customers pass and where processes are
performed. The arrows represent flows, and can cross because one job or customer can have different requirements (and thus a different flow pattern) than the next
FIGURE 1.2
job or customer.
Processes and Operations
Processes provide outputs to customers. These outputs may
often be services (that can take the form of information) or tanExternal environment
gible products. Every process and every person in an organization has customers. Some are external customers, who may be
Internal and external
end users or intermediaries (e.g., manufacturers, financial insticustomers
tutions, or retailers) buying the firm’s finished services or products. Others are internal customers, who may be employees in
Inputs
Outputs
the firm whose process inputs are actually the outputs of earlier
Processes and
Workers
• Goods
operations
Managers
• Services
processes managed within the firm. Either way, processes must
Equipment
be managed with the customer in mind.
1
3
Facilities
In a similar fashion, every process and every person in an or5
Materials
ganization relies on suppliers. External suppliers may be other
Land
2
4
businesses or individuals who provide the resources, services,
Energy
products, and materials for the firm’s short-term and long-term
needs. Processes also have internal suppliers, who may be emInformation on
ployees or processes that supply important information or
performance
materials.

The employees or processes that
supply important information or
materials to a firm’s processes.


Three other landmark events from the twentieth century define the history of operations and
supply chain management. First is the invention of the assembly line for the Model T car by Henry
Ford in 1909. The era of mass production was born, where complex products like automobiles
could be manufactured in large numbers at affordable prices through repetitive manufacturing.
Second, Alfred Sloan in the 1930s introduced the idea of strategic planning for achieving product
proliferation and variety, with the newly founded General Motors Corporation offering “a car for
every purse and purpose.” Finally, with the publication of the Toyota Production System in 1978,
Taiichi Ohno laid the groundwork for removing wasteful activities from an organization, a concept that we explore further in this book while learning about lean systems.
The recent history of operations and supply chains over the past three decades has been
steeped in technological advances. The 1980s were characterized by wide availability of computer aided design (CAD), computer aided manufacturing (CAM), and automation. Information
technology applications started playing an increasingly important role in 1990s, and started connecting the firm with its extended enterprise through Enterprise Resource Planning Systems and
outsourced technology hosting for supply chain solutions. Service organizations like Federal Express, United Parcel Service (UPS), and Walmart also became sophisticated users of information
technology in operations, logistics, and management of supply chains. The new millennium has
seen an acceleration of this trend, along with an increased focus on sustainability and the natural
environment. We cover all these ideas and topical areas in greater detail throughout this book.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

25

Inputs and outputs vary depending on the service or product provided. For example, inputs
at a jewelry store include merchandise, the store building, registers, the jeweler, and customers;
outputs to external customers are services and sold merchandise. Inputs to a factory manufacturing blue jeans include denim, machines, the plant, workers, managers, and services provided by
outside consultants; outputs are clothing and supporting services. The fundamental role of inputs, processes, and customer outputs holds true for processes at all organizations.
Figure 1.2 can represent a whole firm, a department, a small group, or even a single individual. Each one has inputs and uses processes at various operations to provide outputs. The dashed
lines represent two special types of input: participation by customers and information on performance from both internal and external sources. Participation by customers occurs not only when
they receive outputs, but also when they take an active part in the processes, such as when students participate in a class discussion. Information on performance includes internal reports on
customer service or inventory levels and external information from market research, government
reports, or telephone calls from suppliers. Managers need all types of information to manage processes most effectively.

Nested Processes
Processes can be broken down into subprocesses, which in turn can be broken down further into
still more subprocesses. We refer to this concept of a process within a process as a nested process.
It may be helpful to separate one part of a process from another for several reasons. One person or
one department may be unable to perform all parts of the process, or different parts of the process
may require different skills. Some parts of the process may be designed for routine work while
other parts may be geared for customized work. The concept of nested processes is illustrated in
greater detail in Chapter 4, “Analyzing Processes,” where we reinforce the need to understand and
improve activities within a business and each process’s inputs and outputs.

nested process
The concept of a process within
a process.

Service and Manufacturing Processes
Two major types of processes are (1) service and (2) manufacturing. Service processes pervade
the business world and have a prominent place in our discussion of operations management.
Manufacturing processes are also important; without them the products we enjoy as part of our
daily lives would not exist. In addition, manufacturing gives rise to service opportunities.

Differences Why do we distinguish between service and manufacturing processes? The answer
lies at the heart of the design of competitive processes. While Figure 1.3 shows several distinctions
between service and manufacturing processes along a continuum, the two key differences that
we discuss in detail are (1) the nature of their output and (2) the degree of customer contact. In
general, manufacturing processes also have longer response
times, are more capital intensive, and their quality can be
measured more easily than those of service processes.
Manufacturing processes convert materials into goods
More like a
that have a physical form we call products. For example, an
manufacturing
assembly line produces a 350 Z sports car, and a tailor proprocess
duces an outfit for the rack of an upscale clothing store. The
transformation processes change the materials on one or
more of the following dimensions:
1.

Physical properties

2.

Shape

3.

Size (e.g., length, breadth, and height of a rectangular
block of wood)

4.

Surface finish

5.

Joining parts and materials

•
•
•
•
•
•

Physical, durable output
Output can be inventoried
Low customer contact
Long response time
Capital intensive
Quality easily measured

The outputs from manufacturing processes can be produced, stored, and transported in anticipation of future demand.
If a process does not change the properties of materials on at least one of these five dimensions, it is considered a service (or nonmanufacturing) process. Service processes tend to produce intangible, perishable outputs. For example, the output from the auto loan process of a bank
would be a car loan, and an output of the order fulfillment process of the U.S. Postal Service is
the delivery of your letter. The outputs of service processes typically cannot be held in a finished
goods inventory to insulate the process from erratic customer demands.

More like
a service
process

•
•
•
•
•
•

Intangible, perishable output
Output cannot be inventoried
High customer contact
Short response time
Labor intensive
Quality not easily measured

 FIGURE 1.3
Continuum of Characteristics
of Manufacturing and Service
Processes

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

A second key difference between service processes and manufacturing processes is degree of
customer contact. Service processes tend to have a higher degree of customer contact. Customers
may take an active role in the process itself, as in the case of shopping in a supermarket, or they
may be in close contact with the service provider to communicate specific needs, as in the case of
a medical clinic. Manufacturing processes tend to have less customer contact. For example, washing machines are ultimately produced to meet retail forecasts. The process requires little information from the ultimate consumers (you and me), except indirectly through market surveys and
market focus groups. Even though the distinction between service and manufacturing processes
on the basis of customer contact is not perfect, the important point is that managers must recognize the degree of customer contact required when designing processes.

Similarities

At the level of the firm, service providers do not just offer services and manufacturers do not just offer products. Patrons of a restaurant expect good service and good food.
A customer purchasing a new computer expects a good product as well as a good warranty, maintenance, replacement, and financial services.
Further, even though service processes do not keep finished goods inventories, they do
inventory their inputs. For example, hospitals keep inventories of medical supplies and materials needed for day-to-day operations. Some manufacturing processes, on the other hand,
do not inventory their outputs because they are too costly. Such would be the case with lowvolume customized products (e.g., tailored suits) or products with short shelf lives (e.g., daily
newspapers).
When you look at what is being done at the process level, it is much easier to see whether the
process is providing a service or manufacturing a product. However, this clarity is lost when the
whole company is classified as either a manufacturer or a service provider because it often performs both types of processes. For example, the process of cooking a hamburger at a McDonald’s
is a manufacturing process because it changes the material’s physical properties (dimension 1),
as is the process of assembling the hamburger with the bun (dimension 5). However, most of the
other processes visible or invisible to McDonald’s customers are service processes. You can debate
whether to call the whole McDonald’s organization a service provider or a manufacturer, whereas
classifications at the process level are much less ambiguous.

The Supply Chain View
Most services or products are produced through a series of interrelated business activities. Each
activity in a process should add value to the preceding activities; waste and unnecessary cost
should be eliminated. Our process view of a firm is helpful for understanding how services or
products are produced and why cross-functional coordination is important, but it does not shed
any light on the strategic benefits of the processes. The missing strategic insight is that processes
must add value for customers throughout the supply chain. The concept of supply chains reinforces the link between processes and performance, which includes a firm’s internal processes
as well as those of its external customers and suppliers. It also focuses attention on the two main
types of processes in the supply chain, namely (1) core processes and (2) support processes.
Figure 1.4 shows the links between the core and support processes in a firm and a firm’s external
customers and suppliers within its supply chain.

Support Processes

New
service/
product
development
Supplier
relationship
process

 FIGURE 1.4
Supply Chain Linkages Showing Work and Information Flows

Customer
relationship
process
Order
fulfillment
process

External customers

External suppliers

26

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

27

Core Processes
A core process is a set of activities that delivers value to external customers. Managers of these
processes and their employees interact with external customers and build relationships with
them, develop new services and products, interact with external suppliers, and produce the service or product for the external customer. Examples include a hotel’s reservation handling, a new
car design for an auto manufacturer, or Web-based purchasing for an online retailer like amazon.
com. Of course, each of the core processes has nested processes within it.
In this text we focus on four core processes:
1. Supplier Relationship Process. Employees in the supplier relationship process select the suppliers of services, materials, and information and facilitate the timely and efficient flow of these
items into the firm. Working effectively with suppliers can add significant value to the services
or products of the firm. For example, negotiating fair prices, scheduling on-time deliveries, and
gaining ideas and insights from critical suppliers are just a few of the ways to create value.
2.

New Service/Product Development Process. Employees in the new service/product development process design and develop new services or products. The services or products may
be developed to external customer specifications or conceived from inputs received from the
market in general.

3.

Order Fulfillment Process. The order fulfillment process includes the activities required to
produce and deliver the service or product to the external customer.

4.

Customer Relationship Process, sometimes referred to as customer relationship management.
Employees involved in the customer relationship process identify, attract, and build relationships with external customers, and facilitate the placement of orders by customers. Traditional functions, such as marketing and sales, may be a part of this process.

Support Processes
A support process provides vital resources and inputs to the core processes and is essential
to the management of the business. Firms have many support processes. Examples include
budgeting, recruiting, and scheduling. Support processes provide key resources, capabilities, or
other inputs that allow the core processes to function.
The Human Resources function in an organization provides many support processes such as
recruiting and hiring workers who are needed at different levels of the organization, training the
workers for skills and knowledge needed to properly execute their assigned responsibilities, and
establishing incentive and compensation plans that reward employees for their performance. The
legal department puts in place support processes that ensure that the firm is in compliance with
the rules and regulations under which the business operates. The Accounting function supports
processes that track how the firm’s financial resources are being created and allocated over time,
while the Information Systems function is responsible for the movement and processing of data
and information needed to make business decisions. Support processes from different functional
areas like Accounting, Engineering, Human Resources, and Information Systems are therefore
vital to the execution of core processes highlighted in Figure 1.4.

core process
A set of activities that delivers
value to external customers.
supplier relationship process
A process that selects the suppliers of services, materials, and
information and facilitates the
timely and efficient flow of these
items into the firm.
new service/product
development process
A process that designs and
develops new services or products from inputs received from
external customer specifications
or from the market in general
through the customer relationship
process.
order fulfillment process
A process that includes the activities required to produce and
deliver the service or product to
the external customer.
customer relationship process
A process that identifies, attracts,
and builds relationships with
external customers, and facilitates the placement of orders by
customers, sometimes referred
to as customer relationship
management.
support process
A process that provides vital
resources and inputs to the
core processes and therefore
is essential to the management
of the business.

Operations Strategy
Operations strategy specifies the means by which operations implements corporate strategy
and helps to build a customer-driven firm. It links long-term and short-term operations decisions to corporate strategy and develops the capabilities the firm needs to be competitive. It is
at the heart of managing processes and supply chains. A firm’s internal processes are only building blocks: They need to be organized to ultimately be effective in a competitive environment.
Operations strategy is the linchpin that brings these processes together to form supply chains
that extend beyond the walls of the firm, encompassing suppliers as well as customers. Since
customers constantly desire change, the firm’s operations strategy must be driven by the needs
of its customers.
Developing a customer-driven operations strategy begins with corporate strategy, which, as
shown in Figure 1.5, coordinates the firm’s overall goals with its core processes. It determines the
markets the firm will serve and the responses the firm will make to changes in the environment.
It provides the resources to develop the firm’s core competencies and core processes, and it
identifies the strategy the firm will employ in international markets. Based on corporate strategy,
a market analysis categorizes the firm’s customers, identifies their needs, and assesses competitors’ strengths. This information is used to develop competitive priorities. These priorities help
managers develop the services or products and the processes needed to be competitive in the

operations strategy
The means by which operations
implements the firm’s corporate
strategy and helps to build a
customer-driven firm.

28

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

 FIGURE 1.5
Connection Between
Corporate Strategy and Key
Operations Management
Decisions

Corporate Strategy
• Environmental scanning
• Core competencies
• Core processes
• Global strategies

Market Analysis
• Market segmentation
• Needs assessment

Competitive Priorities
• Cost
• Quality
• Time
• Flexibility

New Service/
Product Development
• Design
• Analysis
• Development
• Full launch

No

Yes

Performance
Gap?

Operations Strategy

Decisions
• Managing processes
• Managing supply chains

Competitive Capabilities
• Current
• Needed
• Planned

marketplace. Competitive priorities are important to the design of existing as well as new services
or products, the processes that will deliver them, and the operations strategy that will develop the
firm’s capabilities to fulfill them. Developing a firm’s operations strategy is a continuous process
because the firm’s capabilities to meet the competitive priorities must be periodically checked
and any gaps in performance must be addressed in the operations strategy.

Corporate Strategy
Corporate strategy provides an overall direction that serves as the framework for carrying out all
the organization’s functions. It specifies the business or businesses the company will pursue, isolates new opportunities and threats in the environment, and identifies growth objectives.
Developing a corporate strategy involves four considerations: (1) monitoring and adjusting
to changes in the business environment, (2) identifying and developing the firm’s core competencies, (3) developing the firm’s core processes, and (4) developing the firm's global strategies.

Environmental Scanning The external business environment in which a firm competes
changes continually and an organization needs to adapt to those changes. Adaptation begins
with environmental scanning, the process by which managers monitor trends in the environment (e.g., the industry, the marketplace, and society) for potential opportunities or threats.
A crucial reason for environmental scanning is to stay ahead of the competition. Competitors
may be gaining an edge by broadening service or product lines, improving quality, or lowering
costs. New entrants into the market or competitors that offer substitutes for a firm’s service or
product may threaten continued profitability. Other important environmental concerns include
economic trends, technological changes, political conditions, social changes (i.e., attitudes toward work), and the availability of vital resources. For example, car manufacturers recognize
that dwindling oil reserves will eventually require alternative fuels for their cars. Consequently,
they have designed prototype cars that use hydrogen or electric power as supplements to gasoline as a fuel.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

29

Developing Core Competencies

Good managerial skill alone cannot overcome environmental
changes. Firms succeed by taking advantage of what they do particularly well—that is, the organization’s unique strengths. Core competencies are the unique resources and strengths that
an organization’s management considers when formulating strategy. They reflect the collective
learning of the organization, especially in how to coordinate processes and integrate technologies.
These competencies include the following:
1.

Workforce. A well-trained and flexible workforce allows organizations to respond to market
needs in a timely fashion. This competency is particularly important in service organizations,
where customers come in direct contact with employees.

2. Facilities. Having well-located facilities (offices, stores, and plants) is a primary advantage because of the long lead time needed to build new ones. In addition, flexible facilities that can
handle a variety of services or products at different levels of volume provide a competitive
advantage.
3. Market and Financial Know-How. An organization that can easily attract capital from stock
sales, market and distribute its services or products, or differentiate them from similar services or products on the market has a competitive edge.

core competencies
The unique resources and
strengths that an organization’s
management considers when
formulating strategy.

lead time
The elapsed time between the
receipt of a customer order and
filling it.

4. Systems and Technology. Organizations with expertise in information systems have an edge
in industries that are data intensive, such as banking. Particularly advantageous is expertise
in Internet technologies and applications, such as business-to-consumer and business-tobusiness systems. Having the patents on a new technology is also a big advantage.

Global Strategies Identifying opportunities
and threats today requires a global perspective.
A global strategy may include buying foreign services or parts, combating threats from foreign competitors, or planning ways to enter markets beyond
traditional national boundaries. Although warding
off threats from global competitors is necessary,
firms should also actively seek to penetrate foreign
markets. Two effective global strategies are (1) strategic alliances and (2) locating abroad.
One way for a firm to open foreign markets is to
create a strategic alliance. A strategic alliance is an
agreement with another firm that may take one of
three forms. One form of strategic alliance is the collaborative effort, which often arises when one firm
has core competencies that another needs but is unwilling (or unable) to duplicate. Such arrangements
commonly arise out of buyer–supplier relationships.

Romeo Gacad/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom

Developing Core Processes A firm’s core competencies should drive its core processes: customer relationship, new service/product development, order fulfillment, and supplier relationship. Many companies have all four processes,
while others focus on a subset of them to better
match their core competencies, since they find it
difficult to be good at all four processes and still
be competitive. For instance, in the credit card
business within the banking industry, some companies primarily specialize in finding customers and maintaining relationships with them.
American Airlines’s credit card program reaches
out and achieves a special affinity to customers
through its marketing database. On the other
hand, specialized credit card companies, such as
CapitalOne, focus on service innovation by creating
new features and pricing programs. Finally, many
companies are taking over the order fulfillment
process by managing the processing of credit card
transactions and call centers. The important point
is that every firm must evaluate its core competencies and choose to focus on those processes that
provide it the greatest competitive strength.

The popular smiling red bee, the mascot of Jollibee, welcomes customers at an outlet in
Manila. What began from a two ice cream parlors in Manila in 1975, Jollibee has grown
into the biggest Philippines fast-food company employing over 26,000 people in over
1,000 stores in seven countries. By catering to local tastes and preferences, Jollibee took
65 percent of the fiercely competitive Philippine fast-food market, pushing the world giant
McDonald’s into second place.

30

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Another form of strategic alliance is the joint venture, in which two firms agree to produce a service
or product jointly. This approach is often used by firms to gain access to foreign markets. For example, to get access to the large Chinese market, General Motors (GM) and Volkswagen (VW) each
developed joint ventures with Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation or SAIC. 2 The Chinese
partner is a large manufacturer of automobiles, producing more than 600,000 cars with GM and VW.
In 2010, SAIC upped its total share to 51% in Shanghai GM, which is now among the top three passenger vehicle producers in mainland China. Finally, technology licensing is a form of strategic alliance in which one company licenses its service or production methods to another. Licenses may be
used to gain access to foreign markets.
Another way to enter global markets is to locate operations in a foreign country. However,
managers must recognize that what works well in their home country might not work well
elsewhere. The economic and political environment or customers’ needs may be significantly
different. For example, the family-owned chain Jollibee Foods Corporation has become the
dominant fast-food chain in the Philippines by catering to a local preference for sweet and spicy
flavors, which it incorporates into its fried chicken, spaghetti, and burgers. Jollibee’s strength is
its creative marketing programs and an understanding of local tastes and claims that its burger
is similar to the one a Filipino would cook at home. McDonald’s responded by introducing its
own Filipino-style spicy burger, but competition is stiff. This example shows that to be successful, corporate strategies must recognize customs, preferences, and economic conditions in
other countries.
Locating abroad is a key decision in the design of supply chains because it affects the flow
of materials, information, and employees in support of the firm’s core processes. Chapter 10,
“Designing Effective Supply Chains,” and Chapter 11, “Locating Facilities,” offer more in-depth
discussion of these other implications.

Market Analysis
One key to successfully formulating a customer-driven operations strategy for both service and
manufacturing firms is to understand what the customer wants and how to provide it. A market
analysis first divides the firm’s customers into market segments and then identifies the needs of
each segment. In this section, we examine the process of market analysis and we define and discuss the concepts of market segmentation and needs assessment.

Market Segmentation Market segmentation is the process of identifying groups of customers with enough in common to warrant the design and provision of services or products that the
group wants and needs. To identify market segments, the analyst must determine the characteristics that clearly differentiate each segment. The company can then develop a sound marketing
program and an effective operating strategy to support it. For instance, The Gap, Inc., a major
provider of casual clothes, targets teenagers and young adults while the parents or guardians of
infants through 12-year-olds are the primary targets for its GapKids stores. At one time, managers
thought of customers as a homogeneous mass market, but now realize that two customers may
use the same product for different reasons. Identifying the key factors in each market segment is
the starting point in devising a customer-driven operations strategy.
Needs Assessment The second step in market analysis is to make a needs assessment, which
identifies the needs of each segment and assesses how well competitors are addressing those
needs. Each market segment’s needs can be related to the service or product and its supply chain.
Market needs should include both the tangible and intangible attributes and features of products
and services that a customer desires. Market needs may be grouped as follows:
 Service or Product Needs. Attributes of the service or product, such as price, quality, and degree of customization.
 Delivery System Needs. Attributes of the processes and the supporting systems, and resources
needed to deliver the service or product, such as availability, convenience, courtesy, safety,
accuracy, reliability, delivery speed, and delivery dependability.
 Volume Needs. Attributes of the demand for the service or product, such as high or low volume, degree of variability in volume, and degree of predictability in volume.
 Other Needs. Other attributes, such as reputation and number of years in business, after-sale
technical support, ability to invest in international financial markets, and competent legal
services.
2Alex Taylor, “Shanghai Auto Wants to Be the World's Next Great Car Company,” Fortune (October 4, 2004),
pp. 103–110.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

31

Once it makes this assessment, the firm can incorporate the needs of customers into the design
of the service or product and the supply chain that must deliver it. We further discuss these new
service and product development-related issues in Chapter 12, “Integrating the Supply Chain.”

Competitive Priorities and Capabilities
A customer-driven operations strategy requires a cross-functional effort by all areas of the firm to
understand the needs of the firm’s external customers and to specify the operating capabilities the
firm requires to outperform its competitors. Such a strategy also addresses the needs of internal
customers because the overall performance of the firm depends upon the performance of its core
and supporting processes, which must be coordinated to provide the overall desirable outcome
for the external customer.
Competitive priorities are the critical operational dimensions a process or supply chain must
possess to satisfy internal or external customers, both now and in the future. Competitive priorities are planned for processes and the supply chain created from them. They must be present to
maintain or build market share or to allow other internal processes to be successful. Not all competitive priorities are critical for a given process; management selects those that are most important. Competitive capabilities are the cost, quality, time, and flexibility dimensions that a process
or supply chain actually possesses and is able to deliver. When the capability falls short of the priority attached to it, management must find ways to close the gap or else revise the priority.
We focus on nine broad competitive priorities that fall into the four capability groups of cost,
quality, time, and flexibility. Table 1.1 provides definitions and examples of these competitive priorities, as well as how firms achieve them at the process level.
At times, management may emphasize a cluster of competitive priorities together. For example, many companies focus on the competitive priorities of delivery speed and development
speed for their processes, a strategy called time-based competition. To implement the strategy,
managers carefully define the steps and time needed to deliver a service or produce a product and
then critically analyze each step to determine whether they can save time without hurting quality.
To link to corporate strategy, management assigns selected competitive priorities to each
process (and the supply chains created from them) that are consistent with the needs of external
as well as internal customers. Competitive priorities may
change over time. For example, consider a high-volume
standardized product, such as color ink-jet desktop printers. In the early stages of the ramp-up period when the
printers had just entered the mass market, the manufacturing processes required consistent quality, delivery speed,
and volume flexibility. In the later stages of the ramp-up
when demand was high, the competitive priorities became
low-cost operations, consistent quality, and on-time delivery. Competitive priorities must change and evolve over
time along with changing business conditions and customer preferences.

competitive priorities
The critical dimensions that a
process or supply chain must
possess to satisfy its internal or
external customers, both now
and in the future.
competitive capabilities
The cost, quality, time, and
flexibility dimensions that a
process or supply chain actually
possesses and is able to deliver.
time-based competition
A strategy that focuses on the
competitive priorities of delivery
speed and development speed.

Competitive priorities focus on what operations can do
to help a firm be more competitive, and are in response
to what the market wants. Another useful way to examine
a firm’s ability to be successful in the marketplace is to
identify the order winners and order qualifiers. An order
winner is a criterion that customers use to differentiate
The lavish interior lobby decor of the Ritz Carlton resort in Palm Beach, Florida, USA
the services or products of one firm from those of another.
Order winners can include price (which is supported by
order winner
low-cost operations) and other dimensions of quality, time, and flexibility. However, order winners also include criteria not directly related to the firm’s operations, such as after-sale support
A criterion customers use to
(Are maintenance service contracts available? Is there a return policy?); technical support (What
differentiate the services or
help do I get if something goes wrong? How knowledgeable are the technicians?); and reputaproducts of one firm from those
tion (How long has this company been in business? Have other customers been satisfied with
of another.
the service or product?). It may take good performance on a subset of the order-winner criteria,
cutting across operational as well as nonoperational criteria, to make a sale.
Order winners are derived from the considerations customers use when deciding which firm
to purchase a service or product from in a given market segment. Sometimes customers demand
a certain level of demonstrated performance before even contemplating a service or product.

America/Alamy

Order Winners and Qualifiers

32

PART 1

TABLE 1.1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

DEFINITIONS, PROCESS CONSIDERATIONS, AND EXAMPLES OF COMPETITIVE PRIORITIES

Cost

Definition

Processes Considerations

Example

1. Low-cost
operations

Delivering a service or a product at the lowest possible cost
to the satisfaction of external
or internal customers of the
process or supply chain

To reduce costs, processes must be designed
and operated to make them efficient using rigorous
process analysis that addresses workforce,
methods, scrap or rework, overhead, and other
factors, such as investments in new automated
facilities or technologies to lower the cost per
unit of the service or product.

Costco achieves low costs by designing all
processes for efficiency, stacking products
on pallets in warehouse-type stores, and
negotiating aggressively with their suppliers.
Costco can provide low prices to its customers because they have designed operations
for low cost.

2. Top quality

Delivering an outstanding service or product

To deliver top quality, a service process may require
a high level of customer contact, and high levels of
helpfulness, courtesy, and availability of servers. It
may require superior product features, close tolerances, and greater durability from a manufacturing
process.

Rolex is known globally for creating
precision timepieces.

3. Consistent
quality

Producing services or products Processes must be designed and monitored to reduce McDonald’s standardizes work methods,
that meet design specifications errors, prevent defects, and achieve similar outcomes staff training processes, and procurement of
over time, regardless of the “level” of quality.
raw materials to achieve the same consistent
on a consistent basis
product and process quality from one store
to the next.

Quality

Time
4. Delivery
speed

Quickly filling a customer’s
order

Design processes to reduce lead time (elapsed time
between the receipt of a customer order and filling it)
through keeping backup capacity cushions, storing
inventory, and using premier transportation options.

Dell engineered its customer relationship,
order fulfillment, and supplier relationship
processes to create an integrated and an
agile supply chain that delivers reliable and
inexpensive computers to its customers with
short lead times.

5. On-time
delivery

Meeting delivery-time promises Along with processes that reduce lead time, planning
processes (forecasting, appointments, order promising, scheduling, and capacity planning) are used to
increase percent of customer orders shipped when
promised (95% is often a typical goal).

United Parcel Services (UPS) uses its
expertise in logistics and warehousing processes to deliver a very large volume of shipments on-time across the globe.

6. Development
speed

Quickly introducing a new service or a product

Processes aim to achieve cross-functional integration
and involvement of critical external suppliers in the
service or product development process.

Zara is known for its ability to bring
fashionable clothing designs from the
runway to market quickly.

7. Customization

Satisfying the unique needs of
each customer by changing
service or product designs

Processes with a customization strategy typically have Ritz Carlton customizes services to individual guest preferences.
low volume, close customer contact, and an ability
to reconfigure processes to meet diverse types of
customer needs.

8. Variety

Handling a wide assortment of
services or products efficiently

Processes supporting variety must be capable
of larger volumes than processes supporting
customization. Services or products are not
necessarily unique to specific customers and
may have repetitive demands.

Amazon.com uses information technology
and streamlined customer relationship and
order fulfillment processes to reliably deliver
a vast variety of items to its customers.

9. Volume
flexibility

Accelerating or decelerating the
rate of production of services
or products quickly to handle
large fluctuations in demand

Processes must be designed for excess capacity and
excess inventory to handle demand fluctuations that
can vary in cycles from days to months. This priority
could also be met with a strategy that adjusts capacity
without accumulation of inventory or excess capacity.

The United States Post Office (USPS)
can have severe demand peak fluctuations
at large postal facilities where processes
are flexibly designed for receiving, sorting,
and dispatching mail to numerous branch
locations.

Flexibility

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

33

Sales ($)

Sales ($)

Minimal level required from a set of criteria for a firm to do business in a particular market segment is called an order qualifier. Fulfilling the order qualifier will not ensure competitive success;
order qualifier
it will only position the firm to compete in the market. From an operations perspective, underMinimal level required from a
standing which competitive priorities are order qualifiers and which ones are order winners is imset of criteria for a firm to do
portant for the investments made in the design and management of processes and supply chains.
business in a particular market
Figure 1.6 shows how order winners and qualifiers are related to achieving the competisegment.
tive priorities of a firm. If a minimum threshold level is not met for an order-qualifying dimension (consistent quality, for example)
by a firm, then it would get disqualified
Order Winner
Order Qualifier
from even being considered further by
its customers. For example, there is a
level of quality consistency that is minimally tolerable by customers in the
auto industry. When the subcompact
car Yugo built by Zastava Corporation
could not sustain the minimal level of
quality, consistency, and reliability expected by customers, it had to exit the
U.S. car market in 1991 despite offering very low prices (order winner) of
under $4,000. However, once the firm
Low
High
Low
Threshold
High
qualifies by attaining consistent quality
Achievement of competitive priority
Achievement of competitive priority
beyond the threshold, it may only gain
additional sales at a very low rate by in FIGURE 1.6
vesting further in improving that order-qualifying dimension. In contrast, for an order-winning
Relationship of Order Winners
dimension (i.e., low price driven by low-cost operations), a firm can reasonably expect to gain
and Order Qualifiers to
appreciably greater sales and market share by continuously lowering its prices as long as the
Competitive Priorities
order qualifier (i.e., consistent quality) is being adequately met. Toyota Corolla and Honda Civic
have successfully followed this route in the marketplace to become leaders in their target market segment.
Order winners and qualifiers are often used in competitive bidding. For example, before a
buyer considers a bid, suppliers may be required to document their ability to provide consistent
quality as measured by adherence to the design specifications for the service or component they
are supplying (order qualifier). Once qualified, the supplier may eventually be selected by the
buyer on the basis of low prices (order winner) and the reputation of the supplier (order winner).

To get a better understanding of how companies use competitive priorities, let us
look at a major airline. We will consider
two market segments: (1) first-class passengers and (2) coach passengers. Core
services for both market segments are ticketing and seat selection, baggage handling,
and transportation to the customer’s destination. The peripheral services are quite
different across the two market segments.
First-class passengers require separate airport lounges; preferred treatment during
check-in, boarding, and deplaning; more
comfortable seats; better meals and beverages; more personal attention (cabin attendants who refer to customers by name);
more frequent service from attendants;
high levels of courtesy; and low volumes
of passengers (adding to the feeling of being special). Coach passengers are satisfied
with standardized services (no surprises),
courteous flight attendants, and low prices.
Both market segments expect the airline to
hold to its schedule. Consequently, we can
say that the competitive priorities for the

Newscom

Using Competitive Priorities: An Airline Example

One of the competitive priorities of airline companies is on-time delivery of their services. Being able
to repair and maintain planes rapidly to avoid delays is a crucial aspect of this.

34

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

first-class segment are top quality and on-time delivery, whereas the competitive priorities for
the coach segment are low-cost operations, consistent quality, and on-time delivery.
The airline knows what its collective capabilities must be as a firm, but how does that get
communicated to each of its core processes? Let us focus on the four core processes: (1) customer
relationship, (2) new service/product development, (3) order fulfillment, and (4) supplier relationship. Competitive priorities are assigned to each core process to achieve the service required to
provide complete customer satisfaction. Table 1.2 shows some possible assignments, just to give
you an idea of how this works.

TABLE 1.2

COMPETITIVE PRIORITIES ACROSS DIFFERENT CORE PROCESSES FOR AN AIRLINE
CORE PROCESSES

Priority

Supplier Relationship

Low Cost Operations

Costs of acquiring inputs
must be kept to a minimum
to allow for competitive
pricing.

Top Quality

Consistent Quality

New Service Development

Order Fulfillment
Airlines compete on price
and must keep operating
costs in check.

New services must be carefully designed because the
future of the airline industry
depends on them.

High quality meal and
beverage service delivered
by experienced cabin
attendants ensures that the
service provided to firstclass passengers is kept
top notch.

High levels of customer
contact and lounge
service for the first-class
passengers.

Once the quality level is set, it The information and
is important to achieve it every service must be error free.
time.

Quality of the inputs must
adhere to the required
specifications. In addition,
information provided to
suppliers must be accurate.

Delivery Speed

On time delivery

Customer Relationship

Customers want immediate
information regarding
flight schedules and other
ticketing information.
Inputs must be delivered to
tight schedules.

The airline strives to arrive
at destinations on schedule,
otherwise passengers might
miss connections to other
flights.

Development Speed

It is important to get to the
market fast to preempt the
competition.

Customization

The process must be able to
create unique services.

Variety

Many different inputs must
be acquired, including
maintenance items, meals
and beverages.

Volume Flexibility

The process must be able to
handle variations in supply
quantities efficiently.

Maintenance operations
are required for a variety of
aircraft models.

The process must be
capable of handling the
service needs of all
market segments and
promotional programs.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

35

Operations Strategy as a Pattern of Decisions
Operations strategy translates service or product plans and competitive priorities for each market
segment into decisions affecting the supply chains that support those market segments. Even if it
is not formally stated, the current operations strategy for any firm is really the pattern of decisions
that have been made for its processes and supply chains. As we have previously seen in Figure 1.5,
corporate strategy provides the umbrella for key operations management decisions that contribute to the development of the firm’s ability to compete successfully in the marketplace. Once
managers determine the competitive priorities for a process, it is necessary to assess the competitive capabilities of the process. Any gap between a competitive priority and the capability to
achieve that competitive priority must be closed by an effective operations strategy.
Developing capabilities and closing gaps is the thrust of operations strategy. To demonstrate how this works, suppose the management of a bank’s credit card division decides to
embark on a marketing campaign to significantly increase its business, while keeping costs low.
A key process in this division is billing and payments. The division receives credit transactions
from the merchants, pays the merchants, assembles and sends the bills to the credit card holders, and processes payments. The new marketing effort is expected to significantly increase the
volume of bills and payments. In assessing the capabilities, the process must have to serve the
bank’s customers and to meet the challenges of the new market campaign; management assigns
the following competitive priorities for the billing and payments process:
 Low-Cost Operations. It is important to maintain low costs in the processing of the bills
because profit margins are tight.
 Consistent Quality. The process must consistently produce bills, make payments to the
merchants, and record payments from the credit card holders accurately.
 Delivery Speed. Merchants want to be paid for the credit purchases quickly.
 Volume Flexibility. The marketing campaign is expected to generate many more transactions
in a shorter period of time.
Management assumed that customers would avoid doing business with a bank that could not produce accurate bills or payments. Consequently, consistent quality is an order qualifier for this process.
Is the billing and payment process up to the competitive challenge? Table 1.3 shows how to
match capabilities to priorities and uncover any gaps in the credit card division’s operations strategy. The procedure for assessing an operations strategy begins with identifying good measures for
each priority. The more quantitative the measures are, the better. Data are gathered for each measure to determine the current capabilities of the process. Gaps are identified by comparing each
capability to management’s target values for the measures, and unacceptable gaps are closed by
appropriate actions.
The credit card division shows significant gaps in the process’s capability for low-cost operations.
Management’s remedy is to redesign the process in ways that reduce costs but will not impair the
other competitive priorities. Likewise, for volume flexibility, management realized that a high level of
utilization is not conducive for processing quick surges in volumes while maintaining delivery speed.
The recommended actions will help build a capability for meeting more volatile demands.

TABLE 1.3

OPERATIONS STRATEGY ASSESSMENT OF THE BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCESS

Competitive Priority

Measure

Capability

Gap

Action

 Cost per billing
statement

 $0.0813

 Target is $0.06

 Eliminate microfilming and
storage of billing statements

 Weekly postage

 $17,000

 Target is $14,000

 Develop Web-based
process for posting bills

 Percent errors in bill
information

 0.90%

 Acceptable

 No action

 Percent errors in posting
payments

 0.74%

 Acceptable

 No action

Delivery speed

 Lead time to process merchant payments

 48 hours

 Acceptable

 No action

Volume flexibility

 Utilization

 98%

 Too high to support rapid
increase in volumes

 Acquire temporary
employees

Low-cost operations

Consistent quality

 Improve work methods

36

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Trends in Operations Management
Several trends are currently having a great impact on operations management: productivity improvement; global competition; and ethical, workforce diversity, and environmental issues. Accelerating change in the form of information technology, e-commerce, robotics, and the Internet
is dramatically affecting the design of new services and products as well as a firm’s sales, order
fulfillment, and purchasing processes. In this section, we look at these trends and their challenges
for operations managers.

Productivity Improvement

productivity
The value of outputs (services
and products) produced divided
by the values of input resources
(wages, costs of equipment,
and so on).

Productivity is a basic measure of performance for economies, industries, firms, and processes.
Improving productivity is a major trend in operations management because all firms face pressures to improve their processes and supply chains so as to compete with their domestic and foreign competitors. Productivity is the value of outputs (services and products) produced divided
by the values of input resources (wages, cost of equipment, and so on) used:
Productivity =

Output
Input

Manufacturing employment peaked at just below 20 million in mid-1979, and shrunk by
nearly 8 million from 1979 to 2011. 3 However, the manufacturing productivity in the United
States has climbed steadily, as more manufacturing capacity and output has been achieved
efficiently with a leaner work force. It is interesting and even surprising to compare productivity
improvements in the service and manufacturing sectors. In the United States, employment in
the service sector has grown rapidly, outstripping the manufacturing sector. It now employs
about 90 percent of the workforce. But service-sector productivity gains have been much
lower. If productivity growth in the service sector stagnates, so does the overall standard of
living regardless of which part of the world you live in. Other major industrial countries, such
as Japan and Germany, are experiencing the same problem. Yet, signs of improvement are appearing. The surge of investment across national boundaries can stimulate productivity gains
by exposing firms to greater competition. Increased investment in information technology by
service providers also increases productivity.

Measuring Productivity

As a manager, how do you measure the productivity of your processes?
Many measures are available. For example, value of output can be measured by what the customer pays or simply by the number of units produced or customers served. The value of inputs
can be judged by their cost or simply by the number of hours worked.
Managers usually pick several reasonable measures and monitor trends to spot areas needing
improvement. For example, a manager at an insurance firm might measure office productivity as
the number of insurance policies processed per employee per week. A manager at a carpet company
might measure the productivity of installers as the number of square yards of carpet installed per
hour. Both measures reflect labor productivity, which is an index of the output per person or per
hour worked. Similar measures may be used for machine productivity, where the denominator is the
number of machines. Accounting for several inputs simultaneously is also possible. Multifactor productivity is an index of the output provided by more than one of the resources used in production;
it may be the value of the output divided by the sum of labor, materials, and overhead costs. Here is
an example:

EXAMPLE 1.1

Productivity Calculations

MyOMLab

Calculate the productivity for the following operations:

Tutor 1.1 in MyOMLab
provides a new example for
calculating productivity.

a.

Three employees process 600 insurance policies in a week. They work 8 hours per day, 5 days per week.

b.

A team of workers makes 400 units of a product, which is sold in the market for $10 each. The accounting
department reports that for this job the actual costs are $400 for labor, $1,000 for materials, and $300 for
overhead.

3 Paul Wiseman, “Despite China’s Might, US Factories Maintain Edge,” The State and The Associated Press
(January 31, 2011).

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

37

SOLUTION
Policies processed
Employee hours
600 policies
=
= 5 policies/hour
(3 employees) (40 hours/employee)

a.

Labor productivity =

b.

Multifactor productivity =

Value of output
Labor cost + Materials cost + Overhead cost
(400 units) ($10/unit)
$4,000
=
= 2.35
=
$400 + $1,000 + $300
$1,700

DECISION POINT
We want multifactor productivity to be as high as possible. These measures must be compared with performance levels in prior periods and with future goals. If they do not live up to expectations, the process should be
investigated for improvement opportunities.

The Role of Management

The way processes are managed plays a key role in productivity improvement. Managers must examine productivity from the level of the
supply chain because it is the collective performance of
individual processes that makes the difference. The challenge is to increase the value of output relative to the cost
of input. If processes can generate more output or output
of better quality using the same amount of input, productivity increases. If they can maintain the same level of
output while reducing the use of resources, productivity
also increases.

Most businesses realize that, to prosper, they must view
customers, suppliers, facility locations, and competitors
in global terms. Firms have found that they can increase
their market penetration by locating their production
facilities in foreign countries because it gives them a local presence that reduces customer aversion to buying
imports. Globalization also allows firms to balance cash
flows from other regions of the world when economic
conditions are less robust in the home country. Sonoco,
a $4-billion-a-year industrial and consumer packaging
company in Hartsville, South Carolina, has 335 locations
worldwide in Australia, China, Europe, Mexico, New Zealand, and Russia, with 41 industrial product manufacturing facilities and 6 paper mills in Europe alone. These
global operations resulted in international sales and income growth even as domestic sales were stumbling during 2007. How did Sonoco do it? 4 Locating operations in
countries with favorable tax laws is one reason. Lower tax
rates in Italy and Canada helped in padding the earnings
margin. Another reason was a weak dollar, whereby a $46
million boost came from turning foreign currencies into
dollars as Sonoco exported such items as snack bag packaging, and tubes and cores used to hold tape and textiles,
to operations it owned in foreign countries. The exchange

4 Ben

PR Newswire/Associated Press

Global Competition

Sonoco is a leading global manufacturer of industrial and consumer packaging
goods with more than 300 locations in 35 countries serving 85 nations.

Werner, “Sonoco Holding Its Own,” The State (February 7, 2008); www.sonoco.com, 2008.

38

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

rate difference was more than enough to counter the added expense of increased raw materials,
shipping, and energy costs in the United States.
Most products today are composites of materials and services from all over the world. Your
Gap polo shirt is sewn in Honduras from cloth cut in the United States. Sitting in a Cineplex theater (Canadian), you munch a Nestle’s Crunch bar (Swiss) while watching a Columbia Pictures
movie (Japanese). Five developments spurred the need for sound global strategies: (1) improved
transportation and communications technologies, (2) loosened regulations on financial institutions, (3) increased demand for imported services and goods, (4) reduced import quotas and other
international trade barriers due to the formation of regional trading blocks, such as the European
Union (EU) and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and (5) comparative cost
advantages.

Comparative Cost Advantages

Yuriko Nakao/Reuters/Corbis

China and India have traditionally been the sources for low-cost,
but skilled, labor, even though the cost advantage is diminishing as these countries become economically stronger. In the late 1990s, companies manufactured products in China to grab a foothold in a huge market, or to get cheap labor to produce low-tech products despite doubts about
the quality of the workforce and poor roads and rail systems. Today, however, China’s new factories, such as those in the Pudong industrial zone in Shanghai, produce a wide variety of products
that are sold overseas in the United States and other regions of the world. U.S. manufacturers have
increasingly abandoned low profit margin sectors like consumer electronics, shoes, and toys to
emerging nations such as China and Indonesia. Instead, they are focusing on making expensive
goods like computer chips, advanced machinery, and health care products that are complex and
which require specialized labor.
Foreign companies have opened tens of thousands of new facilities in China over the past
decade. Many goods the United States imports from China now come from foreign-owned companies with operations there. These companies include telephone makers, such as Nokia and
Motorola, and nearly all of the big footwear and clothing brands. Many more major manufacturers are there as well. The implications for competition are enormous. Companies that do not have
operations in China are finding it difficult to compete on the basis of low prices with companies
that do. Instead, they must focus on speed and small production runs.
What China is to manufacturing, India is to service. As with the manufacturing companies,
the cost of labor is a key factor. Indian software companies have grown sophisticated in their applications and offer a big advantage in cost. The
computer services industry is also affected. Backoffice operations are affected for the same reason.
Many firms are using Indian companies for accounting and bookkeeping, preparing tax returns,
and processing insurance claims. Many tech companies, such as Intel and Microsoft, are opening
significant research and development (R&D) operations in India.

Shortage of components from suppliers prevented Nintendo from meeting the customer
demand for its popular Wii game system.

Disadvantages of Globalization Of course, operations in other countries can have disadvantages. A firm may have to relinquish proprietary
technology if it turns over some of its component
manufacturing to offshore suppliers or if suppliers need the firm’s technology to achieve desired
quality and cost goals. Political risks may also be
involved. Each nation can exercise its sovereignty
over the people and property within its borders.
The extreme case is nationalization, in which a
government may take over a firm’s assets without
paying compensation. Exxon and other large multinational oil firms are scaling back operations in
Venezuela due to nationalization concerns. Further, a firm may actually alienate customers back
home if jobs are lost to offshore operations.
Employee skills may be lower in foreign countries, requiring additional training time. South
Korean firms moved much of their sports shoe
production to low-wage Indonesia and China, but
they still manufacture hiking shoes and in-line
roller skates in South Korea because of the greater

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

MANAGERIAL

PRACTICE

1.1

CHAPTER 1

39

Japanese Earthquake and its Supply Chain Impact

massive earthquakes on the afternoon of March 11, 2011, which were soon
followed by a huge tsunami that sent waves higher than 33 feet in the port
city of Sendai 80 miles away and travelling at the speed of a jetliner. At nearly
9.0 on the Richter scale, it was one of the largest recorded earthquakes to hit
Japan. It shifted the Earth’s axis by 6 inches with an impact that was felt 250
miles inland in Tokyo, and which moved Eastern Japan 13 feet toward North
America. Apart from huge loss of life and hazards of nuclear radiation arising
from the crippled Daiichi Nuclear Reactors in Fukushima, the damage to the
manufacturing plants in Japan exposed the hazards of interconnected global
supply chains and their impact on factories located half way around the globe.
The impact of the earthquake was particularly acute on industries that
rely on cutting edge electronic parts sourced from Japan. Shin-Etsu Chemical Company is the world’s largest producer of silicon wafers and supplies
20 percent of the global capacity. Its centralized plant located 40 miles from
the Fukushima nuclear facility was damaged in the earthquake, causing ripple
effects at Intel and Toshiba that purchase wafers from Shin-Etsu. Similarly, a
shortage of automotive sensors from Hitachi has slowed or halted production
of vehicles in Germany, Spain, and France, while Chrysler is reducing overtime at factories in Mexico and Canada to conserve parts from Japan. Even
worse, General Motors stopped production altogether at a plant in Louisiana
and Ford closed a truck plant in Kentucky due to the quake. The supply of
vehicles such as Toyota’s Prius and Lexus will be limited in the United States
because of production disruptions in its Japanese factories. China has been
affected too, where ZTE Corporation is facing shortages of batteries and LCD
screens for its cell phones. Similarly, Lenovo in China is looking at reduced

Kimimasa Mayama/EPA/Landov

Northeast Touhoku district of Japan was struck by a set of

Following the strong earthquakes and tsunami, flames and smoke
rise from a petroleum refining plant next to a heating power station
in Shiogama, Miyagi Prefecture, northern Japan, about 220 km north
of Tokyo.
supplies of components from Japan for assembly of its tablet computers.
These disruptions due to reliance on small concentrated network of suppliers in Japan and globally connected production and logistics systems have
caused worker layoffs an increase in prices of affected products, and economic losses that have been felt around the world.

Sources: Don Lee and David Pearson, “Disaster in Japan exposes supply chain weakness,” The State (April 8, 2011), B6-B7; “Chrysler reduces overtime to help Japan,”
The Associated Press (April 8, 2011) printed in The State (April 6, 2011), B7; Krishna Dhir, “From the Editor,” Decision Line, vol. 42, no. 2, 3.

skills required. In addition, when a firm’s operations are scattered globally, customer response
times can be longer. We discuss these issues in more depth in Chapter 10, “Designing Effective
Supply Chains,” because they should be considered when making decisions about outsourcing.
Coordinating components from a wide array of suppliers can be challenging, as Nintendo found
out in the production and worldwide distribution of its Wii game systems.5 Despite twice increasing capacity since April 2007 to 1.8 million Wii’s a month, Nintendo could only ship the completed
units to retailers like Best Buy, Costco, and Circuit City in limited quantities that did not meet the
large demand through the 2007 holiday season and beyond. In addition, as Managerial Practice 1.1
shows, catastrophic events such as the Japanese earthquake affect production and operations in
Europe and United States because connected supply chains can spread disruptions rapidly and
quickly across international borders.
Strong global competition affects industries everywhere. For example, U.S. manufacturers
of steel, appliances, household durable goods, machinery, and chemicals have seen their market
share decline in both domestic and international markets. With the value of world trade in services now at more than $2 trillion per year, banking, data processing, airlines, and consulting services are beginning to face many of the same international pressures. Regional trading blocs, such
as EU and NAFTA, further change the competitive landscape in both services and manufacturing.
Regardless of which area of the world you live in, the challenge is to produce services or products
that can compete in a global market, and to design the processes that can make it happen.

Ethical, Workforce Diversity, and Environmental Issues
Businesses face more ethical quandaries than ever before, intensified by an increasing global
presence and rapid technological change. As companies locate new operations and acquire more
5 Peter

Svensson, “GameStop to Sell Rain Checks for Wii,” The State (December 18, 2007).

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Weng lei/AP Photos

40

A Chinese consumer looks at Timberland products
at a department store in Shanghai, China, November 11, 2010. Timberland seeks to benefit from
rising incomes in the worlds fastest-growing major
economy, and will also invest in its Hong Kong
shops.

suppliers and customers in other countries, potential ethical dilemmas arise when
business is conducted by different rules. Some countries are more sensitive than
others about conflicts of interest, bribery, discrimination against minorities and
women, minimum-wage levels, and unsafe workplaces. Managers must decide
whether to design and operate processes that do more than just meet local standards. In addition, technological change brings debates about data protection
and customer privacy. In an electronic world, businesses are geographically far
from their customers, so a reputation of trust is paramount.
In the past, many people viewed environmental problems, such as toxic
waste, poisoned drinking water, poor air quality, and climate change as qualityof-life issues; now, many people and businesses see them as survival issues. The
automobile industry has seen innovation in electric and hybrid cars in response to
environmental concerns and economic benefits arising from using less expensive
fuels. Industrial nations face a particular burden because their combined populations consume proportionally much larger resources. Just seven nations, including the United States and Japan, produce almost half of all greenhouse gases. Now
China and India have added to that total carbon footprint because of their vast
economic and manufacturing expansion over the past decade.
Apart from government initiatives, large multinational companies have a
responsibility as well for creating environmentally conscious practices, and
can do so profitably. For instance, Timberland has over 110 stores in China
because of strong demand for its boots, shoes, clothes, and outdoor gear in
that country. It highlights its environmental credentials and corporate social
responsibility through investments such as the reforestation efforts in northern China’s Horqin Desert. Timberland hopes to double the number of stores
over the next 3 years by environmentally differentiating itself from the competition. We discuss these issues in greater detail in Chapter 13, “Managing
Sustainable Supply Chains.”
The challenge is clear: Issues of ethics, workforce diversity, and the environment are becoming part of every manager’s job. When designing and operating
processes, managers should consider integrity, respect for the individual, and customer satisfaction along with more conventional performance measures such as
productivity, quality, cost, and profit.

Operations Management as a Set of Decisions
In this text, we cover the major decisions operations managers make in practice. At the strategic
level, operations managers are involved in the development of new capabilities and the maintenance of existing capabilities to best serve the firm’s external customers. Operations managers
design new processes that have strategic implications, and they are deeply involved in the development and organization of supply chains that link external suppliers and external customers
to the firm’s internal processes. Operations managers are often responsible for key performance
measures such as cost and quality. These decisions have strategic impact because they affect the
processes the firm uses to gain a competitive edge.
The operations manager’s decisions should reflect corporate strategy. Plans, policies, and
actions should be linked to those in other functional areas to support the firm’s overall goals
and objectives. These links are facilitated by taking a process view of a firm. Regardless of
whether you aspire to be an operations manager, or you just want to use the principles of operations management to become a more effective manager, remember that effective management
of people, capital, information, and materials is critical to the success of any process and any
supply chain.
As you study operations management, keep two principles in mind:
1.

Each part of an organization, not just the operations function, must design and operate processes that are part of a supply chain and deal with quality, technology, and staffing issues.

2.

Each function of an organization has its own identity and yet is connected with operations
through shared processes.

Great strategic decisions lead nowhere if the tactical decisions that support them are wrong.
Operations managers are also involved in tactical decisions, including process improvement and
performance measurement, managing and planning projects, generating production and staffing
plans, managing inventories, and scheduling resources. You will find numerous examples of these
decisions, and the implications of making them, throughout this text. You will also learn about

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

41

the decision-making tools practicing managers use to recognize and define the problem and then
choose the best solution.

Computerized Decision-Making Tools
MyOMLab contains a unique set of decision tools we call OM Explorer. This package contains
powerful Excel-based computer routines to solve problems often encountered in practice. OM
Explorer also has several tutors that provide coaching for all of the difficult analytical techniques
in this text, and can be accessed from the drop-down menu. MyOMLab also contains POM for
Windows, which is an extensive set of useful decision-making tools to complete your arsenal for
solving operations problems, many Active Models (spreadsheets designed to help you learn more
about important decision-making techniques), and a spreadsheet-based simulation package
called SimQuick.

MyOMLab

Addressing the Challenges in Operations
Management
How can firms meet challenges today and in the future? One way is to recognize challenges
as opportunities to improve existing processes and supply chains or to create new, innovative
ones. The management of processes and supply chains goes beyond designing them; it requires
the ability to ensure they achieve their goals. Firms should manage their processes and supply
chains to maximize their competitiveness in the markets they serve. We share this philosophy of
operations management, as illustrated in Figure 1.7. We use this figure at the start of each chapter to show how the topic of the chapter fits into our philosophy of operations management. In
addition, this text also contains several chapter supplements that are not explicitly shown in
Figure 1.7.
The figure shows that all effective operations decisions follow from a sound operations strategy. Consequently, our text has three major parts: “Part 1: Competing with Operations,” Part 2:
“Designing and Managing Processes,” and “Part 3: Designing and Managing Supply Chains.” The
flow of topics reflects our approach of first understanding how a firm’s operations can help provide a solid foundation for competitiveness before tackling the essential process design decisions
that will support its strategies. Each part begins with a strategy discussion to support the decisions
in that part. Once it is clear how firms design and improve processes, and how they implement
those designs, we examine the design and operation of supply chains that link processes, whether
they are internal or external to the firm. The performance of the supply chains determines the
firm’s outcomes, which include the services or products the firm produces, the financial results,
and feedback from the firm’s customers. These outcomes, which are considered in the firm’s strategic plan, are discussed throughout this text.

Part 1: Competing with Operations
The concluding chapter of Part 1 is a discussion of the methods and tools of project management.
Project management is an effective approach to implementing operations strategy through the
introduction of new services or products as well as any changes to a firm’s processes or supply
chains. Supplement A, “Decision Making Models,” follows this chapter and covers some basic decision techniques that apply to multiple chapters.

Competing with Operations

Using Operations to Compete
Managing Effective Projects
Designing and Managing
Processes

Developing a Process Strategy
Analyzing Processes
Managing Quality
Planning Capacity
Managing Process Constraints
Designing Lean Systems
Designing and Managing
Supply Chains

Managing Inventories
Designing Effective
Supply Chains
Locating Facilities

Part 2: Designing and Managing Processes
In Part 2, we focus on analyzing processes and how they can be improved to meet the goals
of the operations strategy. We begin by addressing the strategic aspects of process design and
then present a six-step systematic approach to process analysis. Each chapter in this part
deals with some aspect of that approach. We discuss the tools that help managers analyze
processes, and we reveal the methods firms use to measure process performance and quality. These methods provide the foundation for programs such as Six Sigma and total quality
management.
Determining the best process capacity with effective constraint management and making
processes “lean” by eliminating activities that do not add value while improving those that do are
also key decisions in the redesign of processes. The activities involved in managing processes are

Integrating the Supply Chain
Managing Sustainable
Supply Chains
Forecasting Demand
Planning and Scheduling
Operations
Planning Sufficient Resources
 FIGURE 1.7
Managing Processes and
Supply Chains

42

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

essential for providing significant benefits to the firm. Effective management of its processes can
allow a firm to reduce its costs and also increase customer satisfaction.

Part 3: Designing and Managing Supply Chains
The management of supply chains is based upon process management and operations strategy.
In Part 2, we focus on individual processes. The focus of Part 3, however, is on supply chains
involving processes both internal and external to the firm and the tools that enhance their execution. We begin this part with a look at managing inventory in supply chains. We follow that
with understanding how the design of supply chains and major strategic decisions, such as outsourcing, inventory placement, and locating facilities affect performance. We also look at contemporary issues surrounding supply chain integration and the impact of supply chains on the
environment. We follow that with chapters focused on three key planning activities for the effective operation of supply chains: (1) forecasting, (2) operations planning and scheduling, and
(3) resource planning.

Adding Value with Process Innovation in Supply Chains
It is important to note that the effective operation of a firm and its supply chain is as important
as the design and implementation of its processes. Process innovation can make a big difference
even in a low-growth industry. Examining processes from the perspective of the value they add is
an important part of a successful manager’s agenda, as is gaining an understanding of how core
processes and related supply chains are linked to their competitive priorities, markets, and the
operations strategy of a firm. As illustrated by Zara in Managerial Practice 1.2, who says operations
management does not make a difference?

MANAGERIAL

PRACTICE

1.2

Zara–“Fast Fashion” Operational Innovation

Ortega who started the business with 5,000 pesetas. In 1975, he opened his
first Zara store in Spain. The innovation ethos that has always been consistent
with Zara has been Ortega’s view that modern women desire fashionable and
good quality clothes, and Ortega has always believed that this requires operational innovations that will quickly translate catwalk and celebrity endorsed
fashions into new in-demand clothes, which provide Zara with a competitive
advantage over its rivals. By 2009, Zara had over 1,425 stores globally operating on either owned-joint venture or franchise arrangements. Its major presence remains within the European regions (78%) and the Americas (11% of
stores), but it also has a presence in Middle East, Africa, and the Asia Pacific.
The principle that underpins “fast fashion” is the reduction of lead times
to get the product from concept to consumer. Zara’s products and clothes
are recognized as being fashionable, meeting the current (in-demand) fashion trends and tastes for their customers. Frequently, these tastes may vary
by geographical region with scope for country and even regional variances.
Zara’s global fashion retail operating geographical regions are: Europe, North
and South America, The Middle East, Africa and the Asia Pacific.
As the clothes market is typically volatile due to quick changes in fashion, the Zara operational innovation allows for short life cycles, as the company
understands that products will only be temporally fashionable. This is an important aspect of Zara’s operations that typifies their continued success. The
nature of Zara’s market and likely order winners for Zara are that its designs are
fashionable and are developed to meet fashion trends and tastes of customers
who require fashion not durability. Zara’s market is based on translating catwalk
fashion quickly, while in-demand for a relatively short period of time, and for
continuous replenishment with the next must-have fashion design.
Zara customers appreciate design exclusivity; they want a product with
a short life cycle as this also contributes to its exclusivity. With this in mind,
stores are stocked with new designs twice weekly, and collections are small

© Leo Mason/Corbis

Zara, the flagship brand of Inditex, was founded in 1963 by Amancio

Zara’s “fast-fashion” operational innovation and speed of response supply
is typically 3 weeks compared to 3-9 months for the competition.

and often sell out, which adds to the air of exclusivity and the reduction of the
need for markdowns or sale items. Some of the operational innovations that
have enable Zara to remain competitive for nearly 40 years is their vertical
integrated business model which covers design, production, marketing and
sales. Zara controls its entire production chain, whereas it main competitors
Gap and H&M outsource all of their production.
Zara’s “fast fashion” operational innovation and speed of response supply
is typically a remarkable 3 weeks in comparison to the competitors’ 3–9 months.
This provides the company with significant competitive advantages over their main
rivals. It also ensures that production is more closely aligned to demand, in the right
locations, while also keeping inventory markdowns and sale items to a minimum.

Source: Barnes, L. & Lea-Greenwood, G. (2010) Fast Fashion in the Retail Store Environment. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management 38(10): 760–772.
Lopez, C. & Fan, Y. (2009) Internationalisation of the Spanish Fashion brand Zara. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management 13(2): 279–296.
Rohwedder, C. & Johnson, K. (2008) Pace Setting Zara seeks more speed to fight its rising cheap-chic rivals. The Wall Street Journal. February (20) B1.

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

CHAPTER 1

43

The topics in this text will help you meet operations challenges and achieve operational innovation regardless of your chosen career path.

LEARNING GOALS IN REVIEW
 Describe operations and supply chains in terms of inputs, processes, outputs, information flows, suppliers, and customers.
Review Figure 1.4 for the important supply chain linkage and
information flows. The section “Operations and Supply Chain
Management across the Organization,” pp. 22–23, shows how
different functional areas of business come together to create
value for a firm.

important illustrations and examples of how leading edge firms
implemented different competitive priorities to create a unique
positioning in the marketplace.

 Explain how operations can be used as a competitive weapon.
The section “Operations Strategy as a Pattern of Decisions,”
p. 35, shows how firms must identify gaps in their competitive
priorities and build capabilities through related process and
operational changes. Make sure that you review Table 1.3 that
provides a nice illustrative example.

 Define an operations strategy and its linkage to corporate

strategy, as well as the role it plays as a source of competitive advantage in a global marketplace. See the sections on
“Operations Strategy” and “Corporate Strategy,” pp. 27–30, and
review Figure 1.5.

 Identify the global trends and challenges facing operations

 Identify nine competitive priorities used in operations strategy,

and their linkage to marketing strategy. The section “Competitive
Priorities and Capabilities,” pp. 31–34, discusses the important
concept of order winners and qualifiers. Review Table 1.1 for

management. The section “Trends in Operations Management,”
pp. 36–40, describes the pressures managers face for achieving
productivity improvements, along with managing sustainability
and work force diversity related issues in the face of global
competition.

MyOMLab helps you develop analytical skills and assesses your progress with
multiple problems on labor and multifactor productivity.
MyOMLab Resources

Titles

Link to the Book

Video

Operations as a Competitive Weapon at Starwood

A Process View; Operations Strategy as a Pattern
of Decisions

Active Model Exercise

1.1 Productivity

Trends in Operations Management; Example 1.1 (pp. 36–37);
Solved Problem 2 (pp. 44–45); Solved Problem 1 (p. 44)

OM Explorer Tutors

1.1 Productivity Measures

Trends in Operations Management; Example 1.1 (pp. 36–37);
Solved Problem 2 (pp. 44–45); Solved Problem 1 (p. 44)

Tutor Exercises

1.1 Ticket sales

Example 1.1 (pp. 36–37); Solved Problem 2 (pp. 44–45);
Solved Problem 1 (p. 44)

Virtual Tours

L’Oréal Cosmetics
EDS Industries
EDS Services

The Supply Chain View; Trends in Operations Management
A Process View; The Supply Chain View
A Process View; The Supply Chain View

Internet Exercises

1. Coca-Cola and Nestlé

The Supply Chain View; Operations Strategy as a Pattern
of Decisions
The Supply Chain View; Competitive Priorities and
Capabilities
A Process View; Trends in Operations Management
Trends in Operations Management

2. Xerox
3. L’Oréal
4. Environment, Health, and Safety at Xerox
Additional Cases

BSB, Inc., The Pizza Wars Come to Campus

A Process View; The Supply Chain View; Competitive
Priorities and Capabilities

Key Equations
Image Library

Key Equation
1.

Productivity is the ratio of output to input:
Productivity =

Output
Input

44

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Key Terms
internal suppliers 24
lead time 29
low-cost operations 32
nested process 25
new service/product development
process 27
on-time delivery 32
operation 22
operations management 22
operations strategy 27
order fulfillment process 27
order qualifier 33

competitive capabilities 31
competitive priorities 31
consistent quality 32
core competencies 29
core process 27
customer relationship process 27
customization 32
delivery speed 32
development speed 32
external customers 24
external suppliers 24
internal customers 24

order winner 31
process 22
productivity 36
supplier relationship process 27
supply chain 22
supply chain management 22
support process 27
time-based competition 31
top quality 32
variety 32
volume flexibility 32

Solved Problem 1
Natalie Attire makes fashionable garments. During a particular week, employees worked 360 hours
to produce a batch of 132 garments, of which 52 were “seconds” (meaning that they were flawed).
Seconds are sold for $90 each at Attire’s Factory Outlet Store. The remaining 80 garments are
sold to retail distribution at $200 each. What is the labor productivity ratio of this manufacturing
process?
SOLUTION
Value of output = (52 defective * 90>defective) + (80 garments * 200>garment)
= $20,680
Labor hours of input = 360 hours
Output
$20,680
=
Labor productivity =
Input
360 hours
= $57.44 in sales per hour

Solved Problem 2
Student tuition at Boehring University is $150 per semester credit hour. The state supplements
school revenue by $100 per semester credit hour. Average class size for a typical 3-credit course
is 50 students. Labor costs are $4,000 per class, materials costs are $20 per student per class, and
overhead costs are $25,000 per class.
a.

What is the multifactor productivity ratio for this course process?

b.

If instructors work an average of 14 hours per week for 16 weeks for each 3-credit class of 50
students, what is the labor productivity ratio?

SOLUTION
a. Multifactor productivity is the ratio of the value of output to the value of input resources.
50 students 3 credit hours $150 tuition + $100 state support
ba
ba
b
Value of output = a
class
students
credit hour
= $37,500>class
Value of inputs = Labor + Materials + Overhead
= $4,000 + ($20>student * 50 students>class) + $25,000
= $30,000>class
$37,500>class
Output
=
= 1.25
Multifactor productivity =
Input
$30,000>class

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

b.

CHAPTER 1

45

Labor productivity is the ratio of the value of output to labor hours. The value of output is the
same as in part (a), or $37,500/class, so
Labor hours of input = a

14 hours
16 weeks
b a
b = 224 hours/class
week
class
$37,500>class
Output
=
= $167.41>hour
Labor productivity =
Input
224 hours>class

Discussion Questions
1.

Wild West, Inc., is a regional telephone company that
inherited nearly 100,000 employees and 50,000 retirees
from AT&T. Wild West has a new mission: to diversify. It
calls for a 10-year effort to enter the financial services, real
estate, cable TV, home shopping, entertainment, and cellular communication services markets—and to compete
with other telephone companies. Wild West plans to provide cellular and fiber-optic communications services in
markets with established competitors, such as the United
Kingdom, and in markets with essentially no competition,
such as Russia and former Eastern Bloc countries.

operations management decisions (i.e., decisions relating
to capacity and workforce)?
7.

You are designing a grocery delivery business. Via the Internet, your company will offer staples and frozen foods
in a large metropolitan area and then deliver them within
a customer-defined window of time. You plan to partner
with two major food stores in the area. What should be
your competitive priorities and what capabilities do you
want to develop in your core and support processes?

8.

FedEx built its business on quick, dependable delivery of
items being shipped by air from one business to another.
Its early advantages included global tracking of shipments
using Web technology. The advancement of Internet
technology enabled competitors to become much more
sophisticated in order tracking. In addition, the advent of
Web-based businesses put pressure on increased ground
transportation deliveries. Explain how this change in the
environment has affected FedEx’s operations strategy,
especially relative to UPS, which has a strong hold on the
business-to-consumer ground delivery business.

9.

Kathryn Shoemaker established Grandmother’s Chicken
Restaurant in Middlesburg 5 years ago. It features a
unique recipe for chicken, “just like grandmother used
to make.” The facility is homey, with relaxed and friendly
service. Business has been good during the past 2 years,
for both lunch and dinner. Customers normally wait
about 15 minutes to be served, although complaints about
service delays have increased recently. Shoemaker is currently considering whether to expand the current facility
or open a similar restaurant in neighboring Uniontown,
which has been growing rapidly.

a. What environmental forces could be at work that Wild
West should consider?
b. What types of strategic plans must Wild West make? Is the
“do-nothing” option viable? If Wild West’s mission appears too broad, which businesses would you trim first?
c. What are the possible core competencies of Wild West?
What weaknesses should it avoid or mitigate?
2. Consider amazon.com, whose Web site enjoys millions of
“hits” each day and puts customers in touch with millions of
services and products. What are amazon.com’s competitive
priorities and what should its operations strategy focus on?
3. Although all nine of the competitive priorities discussed
in this chapter are relevant to a company’s success in
the marketplace, explain why a company should not
necessarily try to excel in all of them. What determines
the choice of the competitive priorities that a company
should emphasize for its key processes?
4. A local fast-food restaurant processes several customer orders at once. Service clerks cross paths, sometimes nearly
colliding, while they trace different paths to fill customer
orders. If customers order a special combination of toppings on their hamburgers, they must wait quite some
time while the special order is cooked. How would you
modify the restaurant’s operations to achieve competitive
advantage? Because demand surges at lunchtime, volume
flexibility is a competitive priority in the fast-food business. How would you achieve volume flexibility?
5. Suppose that you were conducting a market analysis for
a new textbook about technology management. What
would you need to know to identify a market segment?
How would you make a needs assessment? What should
be the collection of services and products?
6. A local hospital declares that it is committed to provide
care to patients arriving at the emergency unit in less than
15 minutes and that it will never turn away patients who
need to be hospitalized for further medical care. What
implications does this commitment have for strategic

a. What are the possible distinctive competencies of
Grandmother’s?
b. What environmental forces could be at work in
Middlesburg and Uniontown that Shoemaker should
consider?
c. What types of strategic plans must Shoemaker make?
10. Consider your last (or current) job.
a. What activities did you perform?
b. Was your position in accounting, finance, human resources, management information systems, marketing,
operations, or other? Explain.
c. How could you measure the customer value you were
adding by performing your activities?
d. Who were your customers (internal and external), and
how did you interact with them?

46

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

to others. Allen Edmonds, a top-quality shoe company,
considers all four processes to be core processes. What
considerations would you make in determining which processes should be core to your manufacturing company?

11. Choosing which processes are core to a firm’s competitive
position is a key strategic decision. For example, Nike, a
popular sports shoe company, focuses on the customer
relationship, new product development, and supplier relationship processes and leaves the order fulfillment process

Problems
The OM Explorer and POM for Windows software is available
to all students using the 10th edition of this textbook. Go to
www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/krajewski to download
these computer packages. If you purchased MyOMLab, you
also have access to Active Models software and significant help
in doing the following problems. Check with your instructor on
how best to use these resources. In many cases, the instructor
wants you to understand how to do the calculations by hand.
At the least, the software provides a check on your calculations.
When calculations are particularly complex and the goal is interpreting the results in making decision, the software entirely
replaces the manual calculations.
1.

Alyssa’s Custom Cakes currently sells 5 birthday, 2 wedding, and 3 specialty cakes each month for $50, $150, and
$100 each, respectively. The cost of labor is $50 per hour
including benefits. It takes 90 minutes to produce a birthday cake, 240 minutes to produce a wedding cake, and
60 minutes to produce a specialty cake. Alyssa’s current
multifactor productivity ratio is 1.25.

4.

Total Hours

Shirts

1

Sud and Dud

24

68

2

Sud and Jud

46

130

3

Sud, Dud, and Jud

62

152

4

Sud, Dud, and Jud

51

125

5

Dud and Jud

45

131

a. Calculate the labor productivity ratio for each week.
b. Explain the labor productivity pattern exhibited by the
data.
3.

The output of a process is valued at $100 per unit. The cost
of labor is $50 per hour including benefits. The accounting
department provided the following information about the
process for the past four weeks:

1,124

1,310

1,092

981

Labor ($)

12,735

14,842

10,603

9,526

Material ($)

21,041

24,523

20,442

18,364

Overhead ($)

8,992

10,480

8,736

7,848

CD players are produced on an automated assembly line
process. The standard cost of CD players is $150 per unit
(labor, $30; materials, $70; and overhead, $50). The sales
price is $300 per unit.
a. To achieve a 10 percent multifactor productivity improvement by reducing materials costs only, by what
percentage must these costs be reduced?
b. To achieve a 10 percent multifactor productivity improvement by reducing labor costs only, by what percentage must these costs be reduced?
c. To achieve a 10 percent multifactor productivity improvement by reducing overhead costs only, by what
percentage must these costs be reduced?

d. Calculate Alyssa’s labor productivity ratio in dollars per
hour for each type of cake.

Work Crew

Week 4

b. Has labor productivity changed? Use the labor productivity ratio to support your answer.

c. Based solely on the labor productivity ratio, which cake
should Alyssa try to sell the most?

Week

Week 3

a. Use the multifactor productivity ratio to see whether
recent process improvements had any effect and, if so,
when the effect was noticeable.

b. Based on your answer in part (a), is there a type of cake
Alyssa should stop selling?

Suds and Duds Laundry washed and pressed the following
numbers of dress shirts per week.

Week 2

Units Produced

a. Use the multifactor productivity ratio provided to
calculate the average cost of the cakes produced.

2.

Week 1

5.

(Refer to Solved Problem 2.) Coach Bjourn Toulouse led
the Big Red Herrings to several disappointing football
seasons. Only better recruiting will return the Big Red
Herrings to winning form. Because of the current state
of the program, Boehring University fans are unlikely
to support increases in the $192 season ticket price.
Improved recruitment will increase overhead costs to
$30,000 per class section from the current $25,000 per
class section. The university’s budget plan is to cover recruitment costs by increasing the average class size to 75
students. Labor costs will increase to $6,500 per 3-credit
course. Material costs will be about $25 per student for
each 3-credit course. Tuition will be $200 per semester
credit, which is supplemented by state support of $100
per semester credit.
a. What is the multifactor productivity ratio? Compared
to the result obtained in Solved Problem 2, did productivity increase or decrease for the course process?
b. If instructors work an average of 20 hours per week for
16 weeks for each 3-credit class of 75 students, what is
the labor productivity ratio?

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

47

CHAPTER 1

Advanced Problems
6.

per week. When each of the two shifts works 72 hours per
week, production increases to 4,000 uniforms per week
but at a cost of $144 each.

Mariah Enterprises makes a variety of consumer
electronic products. Its camera manufacturing plant is
considering choosing between two different processes,
named Alpha and Beta, which can be used to make a component part. To make the correct decision, the managers
would like to compare the labor and multifactor productivity of process Alpha with that of process Beta. The value
of process output for Alpha and Beta is $175 and $140 per
unit, and the corresponding overhead costs are $6,000
and $5,000, respectively.

PROCESS ALPHA

PROCESS BETA

Product

A

B

A

B

Output (units)

50

60

30

80

Labor ($)

$1,200

$1,400

$1,000

$2,000

Material ($)

$2,500

$3,000

$1,400

$3,500

a. Did the multifactor productivity ratio increase, decrease, or remain the same? If it changed, by what percentage did it change?
b. Did weekly profits increase, decrease, or remain the same?
c. Did the labor productivity ratio increase, decrease, or
remain the same? If it changed, by what percentage did
it change?
9.

The Morning Brew Coffee Shop sells Regular, Cappuccino,
and Vienna blends of coffee. The shop’s current daily
labor cost is $320, the equipment cost is $125, and the
overhead cost is $225. Daily demands, along with selling
price and material costs per beverage, are given below.

Regular Coffee

Cappuccino

Vienna
coffee

350

100

150

Price per
beverage

$2.00

$3.00

$4.00

Material ($)

$0.50

$0.75

$1.25

a. Which process, Alpha or Beta, is more productive?
b. What conclusions can you draw from your analysis?
7.

Mack’s guitar fabrication shop produces low-cost, highly
durable guitars for beginners. Typically, out of the
100 guitars that begin production each month, only
80 percent are considered good enough to sell. The
other 20 percent are scrapped due to quality problems
that are identified after they have completed the production process. Each guitar sells for $250. Because
some of the production process is automated, each
guitar only requires 10 labor hours. Each employee
works an average 160 hours per month. Labor is paid
at $10/hour, materials cost is $40/guitar, and overhead
is $4,000.
a. Calculate the labor and multifactor productivity
ratios.
b. After some study, the operations manager Darren
Funk recommends three options to improve the company’s multifactor productivity: (1) increase the sales
price by 10 percent, (2) improve quality so that only
10 percent are defective, or (3) reduce labor, material,
and overhead costs by 10 percent. Which option has
the greatest impact on the multifactor productivity
measure?

8.

The Big Black Bird Company (BBBC) has a large order for
special plastic-lined military uniforms to be used in an
urgent military operation. Working the normal two shifts
of 40 hours each per week, the BBBC production process
usually produces 2,500 uniforms per week at a standard
cost of $120 each. Seventy employees work the first shift
and 30 employees work the second. The contract price is
$200 per uniform. Because of the urgent need, BBBC is
authorized to use around-the-clock production, 6 days

Beverages sold

Harald Luckerbauer, the manager at Morning Brew Coffee
Shop, would like to understand how adding Eiskaffee (a
German coffee beverage of chilled coffee, milk, sweetener,
and vanilla ice cream) will alter the shop’s productivity.
His market research shows that Eiskaffee will bring in new
customers and not cannibalize current demand. Assuming that the new equipment is purchased before Eiskaffee
is added to the menu, Harald has developed new average
daily demand and cost projections. The new equipment
cost is $200, and the overhead cost is $350. Modified daily
demands, as well as selling price and material costs per
beverage for the new product line, are given below.
Regular
Vienna
Coffee Cappuccino coffee Eiskaffee
Beverages sold

350

100

150

75

Price per beverage

$2.00

$3.00

$4.00

$5.00

Material ($)

$0.50

$0.75

$1.25

$1.50

a. Calculate the change in labor and multifactor productivity if Eiskaffee is added to the menu.
b. If everything else remains unchanged, how many units
of Eiskaffee would have to be sold to ensure that the
multifactor productivity increases from its current level?

48

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

Active Model Exercise
This Active Model appears in MyOMLab. It allows you to evaluate the important elements of labor productivity.
QUESTIONS
1.

2.

If an employee is hired, what will be the weekly number
of policies processed if the productivity of five policies
per hour is maintained?
Suppose that, during the summer, the company works for
only 4 days per week. What will be the weekly number of

 ACTIVE MODEL 1.1
Labor Productivity Using Data from
Example 1.1

policies processed if the productivity of five policies per
hour is maintained?
3.

If the insurance company can process 60 (10 percent)
more policies per week, by what percentage will the productivity measure rise?

4. Suppose the 8-hour day includes a 45-minute lunch. What
is the revised productivity measure, excluding lunch?

USING OPERATIONS TO COMPETE

VIDEO CASE

49

Operations as a Competitive Weapon at Starwood

Pearson

Starwood is one of the world’s largest hotel companies, with more than 750
owned, managed, and franchised properties in more than 80 countries. The
company’s lodging brands include The Luxury Collection, St. Regis, Sheraton, Westin, Four Points, and W Hotels. Its hotels regularly appear on lists of
top hotels around the world. On any given night, guests in the hotels may be
individual leisure travelers, independent business guests, or part of a meeting or convention.

In 2002, Starwood standardized its operating processes so that it could
measure, improve, and ultimately grow its convention business. Each
meeting is assigned a Star Meeting Concierge who works closely with
meeting planners.
When guests stay at a Starwood property as part of a meeting or convention, arrangements are typically made by a meeting planner. The meeting
planner works with a location to arrange meeting facilities, banquet rooms,
lodging, and events for participants. Prior to 2002, the company’s individual
properties had their own approaches to convention planning, yet no consistent, coordinated program within or across brands made it easy for meeting
planners to do business with Starwood. For example, paperwork for confirming program details, rooms, and food and beverage requirements differed between properties and brands. Some hotels had diagrams of meeting space,
while others did not. Technology available for meeting rooms varied widely,
and a hotel liaison was not always immediately available during the event in
case a need arose.

CASE

CHAPTER 1

Recognizing that Starwood’s future growth and success relied heavily
on its relationships with meeting planners, the company held focus groups
to gather information about their needs and expectations. One clear priority
emerged: consistency in the meeting planning process, whether that meeting
was held at the Sheraton in New York, the Westin Kierland in Phoenix, or the
W Hotel in Lakeshore, Chicago. Such a program could create consistency
across all brands, and generate loyalty and increased revenues from those
meeting planners who drive large volumes of business to Starwood properties
annually.
As a result of the meetings, Starwood created the Starwood Preferred
Planner program. Every hotel property now has the same paperwork for the
meeting planning process, and shares that paperwork electronically across
properties and brands. Contracts were standardized and new standards created to recognize and reward frequent VIP meeting planners. Each meeting
is assigned a “Star Meeting Concierge” whose sole responsibility is to anticipate and fulfill any needs of the meeting planner during the event. Handheld
Nextel radio phones are now issued at check-in to the meeting planners at no
extra charge so that they have 24-hour access to the concierge.
To measure the performance of the new process, Starwood set high
internal targets for scores on the surveys given to meeting planners after their
events concluded. For instance, at the Luxury Collection and St. Regis brands,
individual meeting scores must be 4.55 on a 5-point scale. At the Westin
and W Hotels, scores must be above 4.35 on the 5-point scale. Scores from
Sheraton properties must exceed 4.30, and Four Points hotels have a target
of 4.25 on the 5-point scale. Because the expectations for an airport location
one-day meeting (not held at the St. Regis or Luxury Collection) differ from a
multiday resort experience, the targets reflect those expectations.

QUESTIONS
1.
2.

What are the key inputs and outputs associated with Starwood’s new
meeting planning process?
How does the meeting planning process at Starwood interact with the
following core processes in their hotels?
a. Customer relationship (internal and external)
b. New service or product development
c. Order fulfillment
d. Supplier relationship

Theorganicgrocer.com

Theorganicgrocer.com is an online supplier of organically produced fruit and
vegetables. Clients within a 50 km radius of Bangor in Wales are promised
next-day delivery at a time and place selected by the customer. Maria Heales,
a joint owner says, “Our business has been based on market research.We’ve
done a great deal of background work to ensure our business model works.
All the early signs suggested that people would order online if the quality
was good, payment was secure, the price was right and delivery could be
trusted…. ‘Dependability, reliability, timeliness, quality and price’ were the
words that sung out,” she says. The service offering includes delivery, 9 A.M.
to 9 P.M., six days a week; organic produce; and customer-specified date and
time of delivery. All produce is direct from the market on the day of delivery

from a chilled vehicle. The Web site is updated daily to reflect current price
and in-season produce. “The key to our success,” Maria says, “is the simplicity of use of our Web site.”
Vehicle route planning ensures deliveries are optimized, and aggregated stock ordering means only produce previously ordered by customers is
purchased. Customers’ payments are made online using a secure, encrypted
facility administered by a national bank. “But our business has grown, so we
need to expand capacity and capability.We are no longer a fruit and ‘veg’
stall online!” Maria’s husband and business partner, Marcus, says. Their goal
now is to expand their business to include regional franchising, product range
expansion and, for example, birthday gifts, filled baskets, and ready-to-eat

50

PART 1

COMPETING WITH OPERATIONS

gourmet selections. Operating from a small “lock-up” unit on the fringe of
town, expansion of the business would require considerable capital investment. Moreover, the operations of the future business will be more complex.
Currently, 95 percent of the customers are households, with the remainder being local restaurants. Approximately 20 percent of their customer
base generates 80 percent of the profit. Theorganicgrocer.com has a financial system—a computer application that Marcus modified to meet its needs.
A separate computer package generates advertising material and mail-outs.
This tends to be done by Maria when time permits. However, there is little
market information to support strategic operations planning. Much of Maria
and Marcus’s aspiration is based on the success of their current operations
and the hope that the trend continues. Whilst there are several competitors
supplying online vegetables, they do not offer organic products and they
have limited products. They are, however, some 20 percent cheaper than
Theorganicgrocer.com.
As business has grown, there have been complaints of damaged products, and growth in customers has caused the average on-time deliveries
(plus or minus 20 minutes) to fall from 95 percent to 75 percent. All this,
Maria and Marcus argue, is more reason for expanding the business.

Marcus enjoys the technical aspects of the online business, and spends
much of his time modifying and improving the Web site. When necessary,
he helps to consolidate customers’ orders. “I think my time is better spent
on Web site development,” Marcus says; “It’s critical for the business if it
goes down or it isn’t showing current product information, then sales are
jeopardized.” Presently, Maria takes responsibility for placing orders to their
thirty suppliers. Maria and the delivery drivers pack customer orders into salvaged cardboard boxes that are of various sizes and often damaged. “But at
least they are free!” she laughs.

QUESTIONS
1.

2.
3.
4.

What are the comparative operational differences of a conventional
“bricks and mortar” grocery to an online operation? What are the comparative value chains for each system?
What are the key processes in the online operation?
Where are the possible operational problem areas of their online business, now and in the future?
What operational improvements need to be taken now to improve
competitiveness?

Source: This fictional case was prepared by Dr. David Parker, The University of Queensland, Business School, as a basis of classroom discussion.

Selected References
Chase, Richard B., and Uday M. Apte. “A History of Research in Service
Operations: What’s the Big Idea?” Journal of Operations Management, vol. 25, no. 2 (2007), pp. 375–386.
Collis, David J. and Michael G. Rukstad. “Can You Say What Your Strategy Is?” Harvard Business Review, vol. 86, no. 4 (2008), pp. 82–90.
Fitzsimmons, James A., and Mona Fitzsimmons. Service Management.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Gaimon, Cheryl. “The Management of Technology: A Production and
Operations Management Perspective.” Production and Operations
Management, vol. 17, no. 1 (2008), pp. 1–11.
Hammer, Michael. “Deep Change: How Operational Innovation Can
Transform Your Company.” Harvard Business Review (April 2004),
pp. 85–93.
Heineke, Janelle, and Mark Davis. “The Emergence of Service Operations as an Academic Discipline.” Journal of Operations Management, vol. 25, no. 2 (2007), pp. 364–374.
Hill, Terry. Manufacturing Strategy: Text and Cases, 3rd ed. Homewood, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Huckman, Robert S., and Darren E. Zinner. “Does Focus Improve
Operational Performance? Lessons from the Management of
Clinical Trials.” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 29 (2008),
pp. 173–193.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David P. Norton. Balanced Scoreboard. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
Karmarkar, Uday. “Will You Survive the Services Revolution?” Harvard
Business Review, vol. 82 (2004), pp. 100–108.
King Jr., Neil. “A Whole New World.” Wall Street Journal (September
27, 2004).
Meyer, Christopher and Andre Schwager. “Understanding customer
experience.” Harvard Business Review, vol. 85 (2007), pp. 116–126.

Neilson, Gary L., Karla L. Martin, and Elizabeth Powers. “The secrets
to successful strategy execution.” Harvard Business Review, vol. 86,
no. 6 (2008), pp. 60–70.
Pande, Peter S., Robert P. Neuman, and Roland R. Cavanagh. The Six
Sigma Way. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Porter, Michael. Competitive Advantage. New York: The Free Press,
1987.
Porter, Michael E., and Mark R. Kramer. “Strategy and Society: The Link
Between Competitive Advantage and Corporate Social Responsibility.” Harvard Business Review, vol. 84, no. 12 (2006), pp. 78–92.
Powell, Bill. “It’s All Made in China Now.” Fortune (March 4, 2002),
pp. 121–128.
Safizadeh, M. Hossein, Larry P. Ritzman, Deven Sharma, and Craig
Wood. “An Empirical Analysis of the Product–Process Matrix.”
Management Science, vol. 42, no. 11 (1996), pp. 1576–1591.
Skinner, Wickham. “Manufacturing—Missing Link in Corporate Strategy.” Harvard Business Review (May–June 1969), pp. 136–145.
Svensson, Peter. “GameStop to Sell Rain Checks for Wii.” The State
(December 18, 2007).
Voss, Chris, Aleda Roth, and Richard Chase. “Experience, Service
Operations Strategy, and Services as Destinations: Foundations
and Exploratory Investigation” Production and Operations Management, vol. 17, no. 3 (2008), pp. 247–266.
Ward, Peter T., and Rebecca Duray. “Manufacturing Strategy in Context: Environment, Competitive Strategy and Manufacturing Strategy.” Journal of Operations Management, vol. 18 (2000), pp. 123–138.
Wiseman, Paul. “Despite China’s might, US factories maintain edge,”
The State and The Associated Press (January 31, 2011).
Womack, James P., Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos. The Machine
That Changed the World. New York: HarperPerennial, 1991.

